---
layout: post
title: Spaces!
include_toc: true
---

i.e. Why I personally prefer spaces over tabs

## It supports Lisp-style indentation
I write a lot of Clojure, and virtually no Clojurist uses tabs. This is because the prevalent Lisp styles line up forms.

Lisp code is typically indented to line up with previous forms.

```clojure
;;; Nested list of numbers
((1 2)
 (3 ((4 5 6)
     (7 8)))
 (9))


(cond
  ((= type :buy)  (buy-item  item-name
                             amount))
  ((= type :sell) (sell-item item-name
                             amount)))
```

## It allows developers to vertically align code
```c++
void doSomething(int foo,
                 std::vector<std::string> bar) {
    
}
```

I've seen SQL queries that right-align clause keywords. This is my personal preference for writing large, presentable SQL statements:

```sql
SELECT department, COUNT(*) as count
  FROM my_table
 WHERE salary < 60000
 GROUP BY department;
```

If you used tabs as the primary whitespace AND wanted to vertically align code, you'd have to ensure that (a) the tab width is the same for everyone viewing your code, and (b) you won't need to add extra spaces to line up your code just right.

Tabs typically have a width of 2 characters or more (though usually 4 or 8). That means that if you use tabs to indent the following code, you'd be off-by-one:

```c++
void doSomething(int foo,
                std::vector<std::string> bar) {
}
```

What do you do in this case? If you really wanted to stick with vertical indentation, you'd be forced to add a space. Now you have a tab+spaces hybrid! Gross!
Not to mention that many text editors have configurable (or a hard-coded-yet-different) tab width, so it'll look like a total mess on someone else's machine.

```c++
void doSomething(int foo,
                                std::vector<std::string> bar) {
}
```


## Whitespace in general is a great idea. Let's do more of it!

Code is for humans, right? Whenever whitespace helps with readability, we should do it.

```javascript
function doIt() {
  /*** Vertical alignment for assignments ***/
  const foo              = "bar"
  const favourite_colour = "red"
  const number_of_items  = 5


  /*** New section (newlines are whitespace, too!) ***/
  newSection({ foo, favourite_colour, number_of_items })


  /*** Final section ***/
  return `foo: ${foo}`
}
```

I create sectioned comments quite a bit. This is useful for sections of code that have a natural linear progression.

Many developers will instead opt for decomposing large units into multiple units (functions, files, classes, etc...), but this is merely one form of organization with its own tradeoffs. If the only issue with a large unit is finding relevant sections, then whitespace with comments could serve you quite well.

If however, you want to unit-test these segments, then decomposition might work better for you. Or perhaps the large function can be tested with mocks instead. Whatever works best. :)

John Carmack of ID Software suggests the flat-function approach: [http://number-none.com/blow/john\_carmack\_on\_inlined\_code.html](http://number-none.com/blow/john_carmack_on_inlined_code.html)

Psychology of Code Readability: [https://medium.com/@egonelbre/psychology-of-code-readability-d23b1ff1258a](https://medium.com/@egonelbre/psychology-of-code-readability-d23b1ff1258a)

MPJ of the YouTube channel "Fun Fun Function" also advocates for this: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bks59AaHe1c](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bks59AaHe1c)

